# Swift Reflections 

### Wk 1 - What Makes E-Lit

To me, a piece of E-Literature distinct from what is considered regular literature is the fact that E-lit is almost a hybrid between regular lit and various forms of digital media. what it is definitely not is a text which was initially a printed work that was transitioned onto a digital format, such as e-books on kindle, and should not be easy to transform from being on a digital device into a printed physical copy. the uniqueness of E-lit is its variety, and the fact that the reading of the text becomes an active experience. this can be as simple such as hovering over certain words to reveal for information, transitioning to different pages through hyperlinks. Or it can become more complex, like an interactive story where you are essentially co-authoring the text, an example of this being the 'first draft of the revolution' by and shade. out of the examples provide during the class it is hard for me to say which I enjoyed most. While I loved the activeness of shade which had you in a at first glance mundane setting which is transformed through the reader inputting commands for the character to progress the story, I found the activeness was more of the focal point at has diminished my ability to absorb the story being told. I believe I liked the gathering cloud the most, as it was a more standard piece of writing that could be followed, with the hyperlinks and extra information found through interacting with the piece adding to the depth of what I was reading. Through this course I expect to learn how to operate in different coding types in order to create a unique story which is further enhanced by the transformative meeting that is E-Literature.

### Wk 1 - Biographical Note

While I admit my practice is still within its infancy, the work that I am most comfortable with is fiction, though I am interested in learning how to better write in poetry and non-fiction settings. I often write while listening to music, as it helps me to channel emotion into my pieces. I also like to create dot points and sometimes a timeline in order to help me structure my story. these tools help me to better plan my piece, but overplanning can sometimes leave me stuck as to writing the finer details, such as specific word choice or length of scenes. I am curious as to which digital environment I find will be a good fit for my writing practice.

### Wk 2 - What defines the ‘Three Generations’ of E-Lit that Flores refers to?

Within her piece entitled ‘Third Generation Electronic Literature’, flores highlights the three distinct generations that electronic literature has passed to. The first generation shared many of the established signatures that print literature had, whole also incorporating links and hypertexts, and was the time of pre-web experiments into digital media.  With the explosion of innovation that was the release of the web, the 2nd generation of e-lit was marked by an increase of multi-media implements, Aswell as a further level of interactivity in the works of e-lit which we now know to be one of its defining characteristics.  And lastly, the third generation of e-lit uses preestablished platforms to publish its works, such as social media, apps and touchscreen devices. This idea of using forms in the eye of populace is unique to third generation, and many works in the 2nd and even 1st prided themselves on innovation and require readers to seek out the work on very platforms created solely for the work.  While they are notable distinctions from each generation, I believe it quite easy to find oneself creating a piece which could be easily identified as a multi generation style of e-lit. for example while 3rd generation e-lit uses existing forms and interfaces, the form of the writing can still be modernist and experimental, which is considered a feature of the 2nd generation. Therefore, while there are noticeable differences attributed to each generation e-lit is such a diverse and emerging form that is easy to create a mix-mash of many styles.

### WK2 - Ai and Ethics

As student majoring in creative writing, it is quite frankly impossible to ignore the looming presence that is AI. A little over 5 years ago, the idea of a future where writers are no longer needed was unthinkable because despite books being a reduced interest in the younger generation there was a least some solace in the fact that there were always going to be people who enjoyed reading new literary creations. While it might stem from a feeling of self-preservation, I strongly believe that AI should be steered clear of any sort of artistic medium, or at the very least at the idea level. I understand why people use AI to help in research or completing mundane or overly complicated tasks, because having a helping hand literally at your beck in call has been in the cultural sphere since ‘The Jetsons’.  But overuse of ai breeds complacency and laziness, and fundamentally new creations are born thorough perseverance. I hope in the future ai is used by those who understand the associated weight of using it, so that it becomes seen as a tool for fine use rather than a swiss army knife.

### WK3 - Closer to the Metal

In today’s digital era, companies already seem to have placed a large focus on making their platforms sleek, clean and easily navigable. Not to say that some of those attributes are a bad thing, I think it’s important for a website you often use to be easy to use. However, I think there is something beautiful about the clunky first draft, where all the parts a fitting just right and it’s a little all over the place. Because in that way it’s not the same repackaged resold platform that every other platform attempts to be. After starting to code within this class, and peaking at that external layer ‘closer to the metal’ as Triscari puts it, I realised that I had found the core of what I was looking for. haven’t you ever found yourself looking at a device or tool around your house, and wondering how they layer the circuitry, how many screws, wires and custom parts are required to create the finished product you see before you? I know I certainly have, which is why I have been enjoying the digital playground learning the small intrigue parts that create the whole. It has also made me realise that works of art that require technology are by no means easier than those made by hand. They require hours of careful planning drafting, editing to finally create a piece you can become satisfied with. Overall, I believe that while very different coding and writing are more alike than simply using a unique language, and learning the coding language will help to ‘translate’ emotions and ideas in a traditional literature can’t.

### WK 3 - The importance of documenting process

In the current digital era, it’s laughably easy to misplace a piece of writing your currently working on, or any other important document. Whether having automated apps or programs to keep track of tasks and work hours, or even the ability simple ability to have all your worked save in files which can be easily navigated, tracking tools remove a lot of unnecessary stress that can rise from the clutter of constantly working on new ideas and projects, as well as making it easy to store ideas or pieces that at first glance you find insignificant that could later go on to be extremely impactful. 

### WK 4 - Architecture analysis

In today’s lesson, the hypertext piece I explored was ‘Real-Time Cancellation Adventure by Vidya Rajan’. The general theme of the piece was exploring how in today’s social media culture, getting ‘cancelled’ is almost impossible to avoid, as society demands perfections from those with a media presence. And even them, sometimes you are cancelled simply out of malice. The textual architecture of the piece is that of the ‘tree diagram’ and as described in Ryan M.-L’s work “are particularly efficient at modelling the decisions that await characters at various moments in their lives”. This style of textual architecture is one I often see in many hypertext fiction, as while being a rather simplistic structure is able to increase a reader feeling of emersion through the small moments of choice. In ‘Real-Time Cancellation Adventure’ the moments of choice are sprinkled throughout the admittedly lengthy piece, but is still a reasonable number of branches, as tree diagram plot structures do run the risk of too many choices, leaving the work to feel bloated and overcomplicated. In terms of the type of interactivity, the work falls under the category of internal ontological. Internal, due to the fact that the reader is placed in the shoes of the virtual character, and ontological because the decisions we make throughout the text have an effect on the history of the world, and the choices we don’t make serving as alternate histories.

### WK 4 - Future Assessment 

While I am unsure of the shape, the rough idea of my final assessment task has begun to take shape and is looking to be about anxiety and a person’s voice, what they choose to say and what they wanted to say. I want to tell this story in a digital space to make use of audio and colour, and to highlight how certain thought are hidden underneath what we choose to say, which I feel can be brilliantly done in the digital field.  This is admittedly a very personal piece, intended to be a therapeutic outlet (as writing often is) but also could be a greater commentary on the expectations of men, and how they should act in parallel to how they should be allowed to feel. 


### WK 6 - Progress Audit

Currently I have no set early concept, but I’ve had a few ideas that I started thinking about but decided against using for a multitude of reasons. One of these was a story focused around the idea of sonder, that every random passerby is living a life as vivid, complex, and rich as your own, complete with their own personal stories, struggles, and relationships, with the story being in the form of a anemone style architecture, but that ended being too complex and not really fleshed out. Another idea I had was a person who take other people’s pain, with a meter going up, and the story being influenced based on whose pain you take and certain milestones in the meter, but I wasn’t confident in my ability to code it. But one idea has stuck in my brain, which is a time-based mechanic, which would reduce upon making choices, and the story would end once it bottomed out. In terms of interactivity, I am sure that I want the readers to feel a strong sense of influence over the text, rather than having some different little interactions that ultimately could be extra paragraphs if the story was transformed into a physical media. After all, the idea must be something only able to be done through e-literature. 

### WK 6 - Planning Session

In the last part of today's class reflect on what you need to do next in your concept development process. Define 3 key tasks, and give yourself a date for completing them.
After hearing everyone else in terms of where they are in their planning, I realise I have a lot of catching up to do. So, before Wednesday next week, I have three tasks that I must have completed, or that the very least have more than partially completed. The first one of these is, obviously, do have a concrete concept for the project to explore. It has to be something more than a theme, but an actual scenario or story that I can begin writing. The leads me to my second task, which is deciding what interactivity and e-lit elements that I want to have within the story. this will be simple once I have a concept defined as then I can look over the different structures of e-lit we have researched in class, and decide which one is best suited for the job. In terms of e-lit elements, such as visual/audio elements and other things, I believe much of this will come through as the writing begins, but at least have a rough idea of which I won’t will help me to have a greater image of what the finished piece will look like. And lastly, I desire to have at least started to map this story, to have 50% of it planned so that when I present my progress to the class jenny and Lucinda can understand where the story is going.  

### WK 7 - Progress Check 2

Compared to last week, I have made a lot of progress in my assessment. Last week I defined three goals I wanted to have completed or at the very least made large strides in completing. These were to have a fully fleshed out concept, decide what interactive or e-lit elements I want to incorporate into my story, as well as beginning to create a map of the story itself. I was able to develop an idea for a story I was pleased with, being the idea of if you had one day left to live what would you do. as for the e-lit elements, I am certain I want to create a time-mechanic, in which as you progress and make choices, time begins to run out, until finally its ‘game over’ so to speak. And while not finished, I have enough branches of the stories architecture to show for my presentation. Due to the concept I chose, having a fully completed map will be tricky, as I can see many possibilities for choices the more, I map. However, I must be realistic and ensure that the scope of the story does not run away from me a lead to an over bloated and low-quality story. after, all at the end of the day while the piece can be digitally engaging and innovative, this is still a class about writing, thus the writing itself should be up to my standards.  

### WK 7 - Iteration

This project has required me to do a lot of iteration, specifically when it comes to the time mechanic as it is a core concept for the story. Ideally, I wanted the mechanic to display the current time remaining  on every room, and that transition to another room would cause there to be a reduction on the time, and if the time went to zero, regardless of if you would have more rooms to explore, the reader would be forced to go to the end screen. Initially, I used Sugarcube in Twine, as when I asked a friend about which software to use that’s what they recommended. However, when I did so I found myself running into problems. The time wasn’t displayed on each passage, so I was unable to tell if the mechanic was working. So, I decided to switch over to Harlowe, the standard software used in Twine and found great success. The variable worked wonderfully, with the time being displayed, the time going down upon moving to different passages and lastly the reader going to the end screen when the time ran out.  while it took a lot of time, I was able to complete a core aspect of my piece, and actually found myself ecstatic of its completion making me realise how rewarding iteration can be once all the hard work pays off. 

### WK 8 - Upcoming Assessment

The purpose of my piece, entitled ‘One More Day’ (placeholder title) is to explore a question. That question being if you had on singular day left to live, what would you use that time to do. The idea came to me rather bizarrely, after having a board game night and barbecue at my friend’s place. Going home I thought to myself ‘man, what a good way to spend the day’, and that got me thinking how I would want to spend my last day and thus this idea was born. The overall vision for this game is that after a brief introduction, the reader has the choice of how to spend the day, trying to use their time wisely. Obviously, this is an architectural challenge, but I have begun making strives in making the scope of this story manageable. Firstly, there are already a handful of what I called ‘fixed routes’ in which after a couple of options, a singular option appears, locking in the player into a single story. some examples are spending the day with family after choosing to call your dad, or spending the whole day driving to a faraway spot to see a beautiful view. These means that no matter how many options I make, there will be some defined routes to go. The rest of the options will be in a network architecture. This will be if you decide to stay at home, or go outside and will have a ‘bucket list’ of things you can choose to do, each costing a different amount of time, never having enough to do everything in one day. While some of the choice will have extra rooms or choices after, overall they will be less extensive then the ‘fixed routes’ making them easier to write more, making the reader feel they have more freedom, thus encompassing the goal of the piece being you get to decide how to spend the day. However, for the sake of ease, I will be showing of a ‘fixed route’ in my presentation to show of the time mechanic in an easy-to-follow manner. 
